You're motivated by the search for life
that's right life on Earth everywhere
has uh needs uses liquid water typically
when people think about an ocean World
other than Earth they go straight to
Europa you're going to Europa low
dipping over Europa but you're not
Landing there oh normally when we think
about a spacecraft flying by a world
it's thousands of kilometers away will
orbit Jupiter but make these flybys of
Europa and the close approaches how
close you going to get 25 km close ones
and uh that's as close as any object has
ever swung by anything suppose you could
just tell Galileo what you're about to
do that what a what a privilege that
would be oh
absolutely this is Star Talk Neil
degrass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist today we're going to talk
about ocean
worlds and we got with us a previous
guest on Star Talk Kevin Han Kevin
welcome back hey my pleasure and welcome
to JPL oh yeah this is not my office is
it you made a great trip out here it's
not my office yeah yeah yeah oh yeah in
your turf at Pasadena California the jet
propulsion Labs I don't ever presumes
that everyone knows what those three
letters stand for but you can take it
for granted if you work here right
everybody knows I don't think everybody
knows uh jet propulsion labs and water
worlds is your thing it is and my God
just just at the dawn of Co you had a
book by that title that's right alien
oceans alien oceans there it is y
typically when PE people think about an
ocean World other than Earth they go
straight to Europa at the top of
everybody's list yeah I don't know if it
has a better PR agent or and so but if
you abstract that idea and go to any
place that might have sort of liquid in
the world doing anything that list goes
up it does absolutely and the these
ocean worlds um yeah Europa is sort of
the the the mother of ocean worlds
Europa again a moon of Jupiter correct
you know and even back in the in the
late 70s we could see with the Voyager
data that something curious was going on
with Europa uh and over the course of
the past several decades we've now come
to learn and appreciate that the outer
solar system has got a small Fleet of
ice covered
worlds and beneath their icy shells
these moons of the outer solar system
have liquid water oceans and of course
the big picture for me is the search for
for life beyond Earth that that's your
your guiding star guiding star I would
love you know life on Mars exoplanets
you know seti Etc but these ocean worlds
like Europa and Enceladus and and Titan
these are worlds where where life could
be alive today extent life oh cuz when
you're looking at Mars no one really
thinks anything's going to be crawling
around on its surface ex whatever might
have been happening billions of years
ago because there's no Active water
activity on Mars well at least not on
the surface exactly not on the surface
there could be in the subsurface who
knows maybe there's life in the
subsurface on Mars but our search for
Life on Mars is a search for past life
and the molecules of life don't last
long so like DNA RNA proteins you know
the stuff that makes our
biochemistry but bones last pretty
pretty long well bones do last long uh
you know and and it's not incon tell
Lucy that we didn't find life Lucy would
have would would beg to differ yeah and
as you appreciate you know back in the
Viking days oh even Carl Sean wanted to
leave uh put some lights on the Viking
Lander so what if there's a martian
Mouse right uh so you know a martian
Mouse would leave Bones by
bones do last for a long time but for
the most part we're talking about the
search for microbial life and microbes
do actually leave behind minerals by the
way if a microb had bones I don't want
to meet
it I don't know what the hell that
microb is doing well some of the most
beautiful like you know if you ever um
see like Travertine or or some of the
beautiful Rock structures that are used
or the bur of shale yeah think is that
in Canada I think yeah bur Shale has got
animals but um okay you know there are
because that was after the Cambrian
explosion if I remember correctly or
during it in that time frame in that
time so they took on very interesting
shapes but they got preserved that's my
point of that right exactly whereas
microbes microbes can mediate Rock
structures and if we see sort of a a
weird wavy rock form sometimes referred
to as a microbial light or a
straty that is a form of a of an
inorganic bio signature for microbes
it's kind of like bones for microbes in
some more it's more of a frozen
apartment building for microbes and you
knew somebody lived there because it's
an apartment building it's an apartment
building but you want to couple that
observation of the strange rock
structure with some detection of organic
compounds or other things but but that's
all for Mars right uh looking at life in
the past billions of years ago on Mars
when it comes to um a separate
independent origin of life and a
separate Tree of Life we're going to be
kind of constrained on Mars because
those large biomolecules of you know if
Life on Mars utilize DNA DNA only lasts
like maybe 10 million or or at best tens
of millions of years in the Rock record
so we're not going to get like Martian
DNA from samples returned from Mars on a
world like Europa on a world like
Enceladus these are worlds where if we
find indications
of life on the surface of the icy shells
that's most likely I would argue an
indication that life is currently alive
in the oceans below and that's
extraordinary because then we can
actually study it and see know does it
run on DNA RNA and proteins or is there
a different ball game mechanism Al
together yeah you know contingent that
completely transform everything we know
of biology exactly you know contingent
Evolution versus convergent in terms of
what is contingent Evolution the the um
uh impact that um uh caused the
dinosaurs to go extinct is perhaps a
somewhat useful though mildly flawed
contingent example you could say that
humans would not be here if it weren't
for the the impact that wiped out the
dinosaur that's definitely the case well
but you might argue that at some point
something else would have wiped out the
dinosaurs but you get my point it's
definitely the case I work at a natural
history museum we got bones everywhere
okay I'm telling you here's the argument
for that just hear me out if you didn't
otherwise know this do you know when
T-Rex went extinct 65 million years ago
do you realize more time had elapsed
between the extinction of the
stegosaurus and T-Rex than the
extinction of T-Rex and today yeah so
dinosaurs Thrive for hundreds of
millions of years if you say well
something might have still taken them
out in the last 65 million years I don't
think so because it would have taken out
a whole lot of other things things and
we would have known about it dinosaurs
were a highly successful phenotype
phenotype is that the right word no high
highly successful branch in the tree of
life the collective things we call
dinosaurs so I think they would have be
been here and we'd still be scurrying
underfoot not trying to get eaten for as
a snack by whatever the version of T-Rex
is that survived today exactly so so
I'll remove any Nuance
give and say that that is contingent and
then convergent is something like eyes
um oh yeah no I got convergence yeah
yeah that one where a highly useful
feature evolves completely independently
right and to to serve the same purpose
exactly so something that I find
fascinating is you when it comes to the
origin of life is the polymerization of
amino acids or nuclear bases Etc is that
something that we're going to find is
convergent so life on EUR Ropo or
Enceladus uh um evolve to use DNA also
is it inevitable right or is there some
other way to get that biochemistry done
now the best argument I've heard for DNA
although it took me part of the way
there but I'm still skeptical because of
the complexity of a DNA
molecule a geologist said look when we
go to other planets the geology is
familiar MH right a rock crystal of
these atoms crystallizes the same way of
given the right temperatures and
pressures here as in there right and so
if the geology repeats itself no matter
what planet we're
on maybe biology will repeat itself
exactly and I thought
okay I I I threw a bone to that and I
said all right let me let me hang with
that for a bit but speaking of Bones I
got a bone to pick with you you you
lumped Titan in with Enceladus and
Europa and Europa how dare you go on go
on WE You're motivated by the search for
life that's right life on Earth
everywhere has uh needs uses liquid
water yep there's no liquid water on
Titan well to be clear there is we do
think that beneath the ice shell of
Titan there is an ocean trapped beneath
that thick ice shell but I think you're
referring to the fact that on the
surface we got these liquid methane and
liquid if you have liquid methane you
don't have liquid water that's right
just to be clear about that okay uh but
it's not just a given that every moon is
going to have a heated interior from
title forces now I didn't do my homework
on Titan before this interview but is it
subject to the same title stressing of
its physical body as Europa and as
Enceladus it's a bit of a more
complicated story specifically at Saturn
and and this is the story is complic
Moon of Saturn right so Titan and
Enceladus and the moons of Saturn um
when it comes to the tides and how much
tidal energy they have now and have had
in the past it's a bit complicated
because the various moons go through
resonances right kids on a swing set uh
kind of pumping each other up to to
swing in harmony or out of phase right
um in the Jovian system with Jupiter
system yeah the Jupiter system with IO
Europa and
ganam those three moons are right now in
a beautiful resonance we call the Lass
resonance so for every two times IO goes
around Europa I goes around Jupiter
Europa goes around Jupiter once for
every two times Europa goes around
Jupiter uh ganam goes around Jupiter
once I did not know they were in
resonance yeah and so that's what keeps
their orbits slly the system evolves to
that because the the dynamical forces
favor it exactly so gradually the orbits
widen out and and then Iowa starts
tugging on Europa and Europa on gamed
perhaps someday Kalisto will be part of
the party but um right now it's not so
that would complete the the big four uh
IO Europa gisto the four that Galileo
discovered right yeah the call them
Galilean moons in fact he called them
Stars I think the medician Stars he was
no idiot he knew where the paycheck was
coming
from because they were just points of
life that moved around Jupiter and why
think it's a moon if it's just a DOT of
light it look like a star so so he
started off really well with like naming
the Stars the the stars of Michi the
Michi family was all happy and he was
like oh no these things go around
Jupiter next thing you know he's under
house
arrest hey Star Talk fans I don't know
if you know this but the audio version
of the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that and Spotify and apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star Talk what then
why not call IO an ocean world let's
zoom out and um and think about kind of
a gold elock scenario right in the early
days of astronomy and planetary science
our conceptual conceptualization for
habitability was kind of framed around
this goldilock scenario Venus Earth and
Mars Venus is too hot Mars is too C
Earth is just right and that's all
mediated by the the energy that the
planets receive from the Sun from their
Central Star not not just that the
energy that reaches the surface because
you can reflect away some energy and
that doesn't participate exactly in the
energy equation yeah and so the the
thinking back then and still today is
that in order to have an earthlike
habitable planet you have to have you
have to be at that right sun star planet
distance so as to maintain and sustain
liquid water on the surface of Your
World whereas what these ocean worlds of
the outer solar system are teaching us
is that there's a new Goldilocks in town
it's a Goldilocks where the energy for
maintaining and sustaining liquid water
comes not through your parent star but
rather through the tug and pole and and
uh mechanical deformation and friction
and internal heating of tides of getting
stretched by Jupiter which is some 318
times as massive as the Earth M and so
back to your question about IO in this
analogy with a new Goldilocks IO is kind
of like Venus billions of years ago IO
may have had water but IO is the most
volcanically active body in the solar
system and it has since lost any water
that it perhaps had in the early days oh
you misunderstood my point go go on you
misunderstood no I didn't make myself
clear your book is titled alien ocean
you're talking about ocean worlds you
didn't you didn't specify water ocean so
you want to you want to qualify a magma
magma ocean on aisle I told you the it
the most volcanically active object
known you find life forms in a magma
ocean that's uh that's I don't know but
fair enough fair enough but you're right
if it's hot enough to melt rock yeah
probably there's no life hanging out
doing a backstroke yeah
but you're you are correct in that there
have been some nice papers on a magma
ocean in iio because that title energy
dissipation is so extreme okay from
avability standpoint it's got a game
over okay uh but also I wanted to think
very freely because you guys make me do
this if we go to Titan where it has
enough atmospheric pressure to sustain a
liquid state of of methane yeah cuz as
without pressure then you lose your
liquid the range of temperatures where
you can keep a liquid right so so maybe
life does not require liquid water maybe
it just requires a liquid can you
imagine a life form where it is liquid
methane coursing through its veins or
whatever circulatory system it has yeah
so I really hope that kind of weird life
exists on Titan the challenge is I
actually have a bit of a hard time
formulating and hypothesis
that it could exist so for example
Europa and Enceladus we can say why
should nature care what you have a hard
time figuring
out are you the metric of what exists in
the universe you're 100% I know you
wrote a book on it and everything I get
that but still right but when we do
experiments obviously with the
scientific method you formulate and
hypothesis yes and so I can formulate
and a hypothesis that uh life on Earth
is based on liquid water a suite of
elements and some energy to power life I
can then look at Worlds like Mars and
Europa and celus and say check check
check now there's a a fourth element
there of time and stability that we can
come back to and there's some
differentiation but Mars Europa and
celus I think we can check the box on on
liquid water and the other uh keystones
for life with the liquid methane uh on
on Titan um it's hard for me to say like
based on what I know of life on Earth or
even oil fields on Earth that uh that a
hydrocarbon liquid could give rise to
life and and here's a the sort of key
chemical difference liquid water is a
polar solvent right so uh in liquid
water we can dissolve other polar Mo
compounds the shape of the molecule
right gives a little plus minus uh yeah
it's got hydrogen and an oxygen and two
hydrogen's coming off at an angle there
yeah yeah and so we get the the
electrons get sort of preferentially uh
positioned such that you end up with a
plus and a minus with a water so just
correct my chemistry if I get it right
so if the two oxygens were sticking
straight out on either side then the
molecule itself would have no polarity
in that sense correct that is there
would be no difference between one
orientation and another and and water
would lose all of its really cool
properties that we cherish well positive
and negative actually comes a little
more from the from the hydrogen uh and
oxygen differentiation right well so
it's not the angle that they're coming
down the angle plays a little bit but
the fill in in my chemistry yeah if you
split it down the middle like the the
oxygen is on one side of the V and the
hydrogen on the other yeah and so if you
flattened it out um you would definitely
affect the charge distribution you know
and it would just be it wouldn't be as
effective at things we care about yeah
yeah and certainly you know coming uh
when it comes to Ice uh you wouldn't get
that beautiful hexagon uh that is in
part uh due to the the the the vshape of
water I think it's like 109 degrees and
then 107 depending on liquid and solid
form but liquid water great at
dissolving other polar compounds liquid
universal solvent we call universal
solvent for life on Earth right but you
go to Titan and now you've got this this
these cold by our standards uh liquid
methane lakes and seas and liquid
methane is
nonpolar and so you're talking about
life arising and and thriving in a
nonpolar solvent and that just makes me
scratch my head it's like could that
work I sure hope it does I sure hope
Mother Nature is is I'm just saying if
you go back aund and whatever years and
when Evolution was first a thing that
people discussed the and in fact Darwin
himself might have called for this what
we need is a 72 tide pool so it's just
right for life to form and then the more
we looked it was like no you don't need
that you can do it this way in fact you
don't even need sunlight I I'm old
enough I'm an old man here my textbook
said life requires sunlight M all right
that's before we had the undersea vents
Thal vents which got a geochemical
energy thermal energy down there so and
now even in modern astrophysics a
planetary uh astronomy
the goldilock zone is insufficient to
get it all all the the places where
you'd have liquid water so this is an
exercise in broadening any definition we
previously laid down for what we'd
expect of Life yeah and I think there's
one thing I be curious to hear your
thoughts on this life is just a biology
is a layer on top of geology okay and
and as such what life does is uh um wait
wait just just to be clear we would
later learn even that some significant
fraction of Earth's biomass lives
underground right as a participant in
the geology that's there yeah so it's
not just life on Earth and then hand
over to the geologist there's this
there's this Zone where the two have to
make nice in the Coffee Lounge right
okay and so life's job in the universe
is to accelerate our production of
entropy and and heat you know abiding by
if you will the second law of
Thermodynamics and so when it comes to
Titan and say weird life on Titan in a
nonpolar solvent yeah I think as long as
there is some energy that needs to be
dissipated in some way perhaps biology
will fill that energetic Niche even if
it requires going way out of the box of
what we're able to conceive of you ever
wanted one of your questions on the
universe answered we all have questions
about the universe black holes to
quazars quantum entanglement wormholes
there is no end to the depths of cosmic
curiosity well the entry level of
patreon membership with Star Talk gets
you just that I think it starts at $5 a
month you have access to the question
line that reaches our Cosmic query
programming and not only that we produce
a special Cosmic query
installment just for patreon members if
you weren't the director of the Hayden
planetarium what do you think you would
be doing okay but this have to be
another Universe it wouldn't happen in
this universe okay I'd be I'd be a a
songwriter for Broadway musicals oo so
that's the entry level and the perks
ascend from there uh there's a level in
fact where we send you a an autographed
copy of one of my latest books uh right
now it's Star Messenger Cosmic
perspectives on civilization and it's
signed with my fancy fountain pen with
purple ink so I I invite you to just
check the link below and all of that
money goes to our ability to experiment
with new ways of bringing the universe
down to earth so thank you for those who
have already joined and we welcome
others to participate in this Grand
Adventure of what it is to bring the
universe down to earth as always keep
looking up I'm reminded in the movie
2010 where we
learn where the life form that made the
monolith monolith came from from 2001
and you remember where it came from it
remind me is it Europa well oh but but
the it came from but that was the the
the solar systems Outpost of this life
was Europa that's right and I think they
found chlorop on the surface of euroa
right so back then there was the
thinking that in in the movie they show
the uh the sort of a green underneath
the that would require a very thin ey
Shell at Europa and uh so yeah that's
where the the sort of monolith stuff
originates but then it it goes back to
some distant place in the Galaxy yeah
and 2001 2010 uh some of my favorite
movies uh but I get no uh ending of
people saying attempt no landing on
Europa based on that M but of course are
you sure you don't have are you
authorized to divulge we we not supposed
to yeah because wait wait dude you're
you're on a mission called Europa
Clipper you're going to Europa y low
dipping over Europa but you're not
Landing there that's right but doing
beautiful flybys but you're not Landing
there corre you're heeding the warnings
of the aliens in 2010 no not at all
there there's a there's a Cadence of
course that's what you'd have to
say it's just what you should say
but but just let's talk about Europa
Clipper yeah uh six-year Mission there
and six six years to get there yeah and
then you got you hang out there a bit
orbiting Jupiter but doing some close
flybys of Europa that's right and it's
very exciting oh it's tremendously
exciting and when we say flybys normally
when we think about a spacecraft flying
by a world it's thousands of kilometers
away the engineers here at JPL the the
the pinball Wizards are are able to get
the Clipper spacecraft what pinball
Wizards because you have
multiple the gravity of all Europa
Clipper is getting a gravity assist from
from what from Earth and Mars and then
once it's in the Jovian system right so
this is a two cushion pull shot to get
to to get to Jupiter to get to Jupiter
at Jupiter then we we go off the
cushions of ganam and Kalisto a bit uh
oh so you get more gravity assist from
the moons that's right very by that time
it's gravity assist to to slow us down
yeah because people forget that you can
gravity assist in either way for your
energetics yeah and so ganam and Kalisto
it's a beautiful thing about the Jovian
system the Jupiter system where those
larger moons can actually help out the
spacecraft Engineers to get into all
sorts of different orbits and so we'll
pinball pinball Wizards great title for
them wait are they okay with the title I
I I use this endearingly with my uh
engineering colleagues all the time and
they like it they like it okay and uh
and so we pinball around uh the um
Jupiter and then we start going into
these roughly 14-day pedals orbiting
Jupiter and making these close flybys of
Europa like pedals of a flower P of a
flower exactly or think about like a you
know those spirograph had one
yeah and so we'll orbit Jupiter but make
these flybys of and the close approaches
how close are you going to get 25 km
some of the closest ones and uh that's
as close as any object has ever swung by
anything it's it's going to be
extraordinary and and the images half a
meter per pixel what yeah and the
Galileo images so think about how
extraordinary the the images from G the
spacecraft okay he
was he did have a telescope and he did
look at
Jupiter to make sure we're on the right
yeah Galo did not have half a meter per
pixel
resolution so Galileo the astronomer
point of light Galileo the spacecraft we
get uh beautiful pictures at you know
kilometer scale suppose you could just
tell Galileo what you're about to do oh
that what a what a privilege that would
be oh absolutely I mean and and you know
that's 400 years ago 400 that's not even
that's nothing that's nothing in the
history of our species yeah just say you
know one day we're going to go there
yeah one of your
medician
y so you're going to a close view of the
surface ice but you're not looking at
the water below and that's what you
really care about right and so what
Clipper has on board are cameras to give
us pictures of the surface spectrometers
to tell us about the surface
composition and by looking at the
surface ice we know from Galileo
spacecraft from uh telescopes that and
Hubble helps out Hubble yeah and uh that
the ice of Europa serves as a window
into the ocean below so using the
spectrometers and looking at the ice we
will get a bit of a fingerprint of the
ocean chemistry but that's only because
they're cracks that might fill in with
the water refreeze that's right and
subduction subsumption over what is
subsumption uh it's that shouldn't even
be a word up to just my opinion here
subsumption yeah is a term uh coined by
some colleagues of mine just oh so all
right you all just made up the word as
we do because I know there's subduction
as when a a continental plate goes under
that's right and then there's yeah and
so sub some words here is kind of
thinking about uh how that might occur
on an icy shell so for the most part you
can think about subsumption as
subduction but on an icy world with
perhaps some other things mixed in
really need another word okay fine you
know
debatable but so with Clipper we've got
these um uh cameras and spectrometers
and then mass
spectrometers that will allow us to
taste any plume material coming out of
Europa well we can we can taste any
organic compounds carbon compounds so
taste you mean almost literally taste
because if you have the molecules and
you have something to detect the
molecule you you've basically tasted the
molecule that's right exactly and and so
I'm I'm a co-investigator on the psea
instrument which is a dust analyzer
masterer uh surface analyzer for dust uh
at Europa it's a acronyms these days
are I'll give you that I'll give you a h
pass on that one they don't necessarily
go by the first letter of the word
anymore okay so that's more of a passive
experiment because you have you're not
you're not aiming for those it has to
sort of come to you
if it happens to be spewed from the
surface exactly think about a kid with a
bucket running through a snowstorm um
it's much more muted than that at Europa
but we will be getting those compounds
into our bucket and passing them through
M and these aren't big plumes like you
find on Enceladus but there is certainly
upward Mo movement yeah so I've been on
uh a team that's used the Hubble Space
Telescope and the James web Space
Telescope to look for plumes on Europa
is it great we have telescop they can
see the edge of the universe and then
right in front of our nose as well this
is this is this is yeah good
people we can get amazing things we got
some people are good folks not just the
astronomers but of course the engineers
that actually make it happen shout out
to the engineer here okay they get the
hard stuff done um so Enceladus is a
tiny moon it's only 500 kilometers in
diameter and very low gravity and so
plumes on Enceladus go out for hundreds
of kilometers Europa is about the size
of our Moon and europa's gravity is
about 17th so Europa is way bigger way
bigger 3,000 km I didn't even think
about that and so so 500 km in American
speak that's like 300 miles across all
right it's still a nice object but it's
not like it's not like Europa right and
uh so what are the chances of you seeing
sort of macroscopic life that might have
bubbled up and landed on the surface
like fishes flopping you asking if our
bucket is going to catch a squid
and you reminded me we you advised on
the movie The sci-fi movie lowbudget but
still carefully conceived and executed
movie the Europa Report that's correct
and I have a tiny cameo in there tiny
little Cameo uh I I think it was on CNN
they used actual footage of me on actual
news commenting I said I want to go ice
fishing on Europa cut a
hole lower a submersible and see what's
there yep and that expressing my
enthusiasm for this you and I that uh if
we could fish on Europa oh man so you
were an adviser to that film that's
right and they did a fantastic job
that's why it was so good not cuz I was
in it but because they thought about the
science well one of the really cool
things you know I've done some
Consulting on various movies and I was
like hey team if we're going to do
Europa we got to do Europa right and so
they um didn't know that much about the
radiation environment of Europa from
Jupiter from Jupiter exactly and so um
that's factored into the movie and
becomes sort of central to the story and
on
Europa that IR radiation of the surface
um would kill an astronaut but coming
back to habitability one of the things
that we're looking for with Europa
Clipper is how some of the radiation
driven chemistry on the surface of
Europa could positively affect the
chemistry of the ocean and the
habitability of the ocean let me give
you an example sulfur comes from
volcanoes on iO the eruptions on iO
exude sulfur and some of that sulfur
actually lands on Europa this is sulfur
that has been spewed forth from
volcanoes faster than the escape
velocity of IO that's right thereby
contributing to the general orbital
environment of Jupiter that's right it
gets spun up in Jupiter's magnetic field
next thing you know that that sulfur ion
is slamming it's an ion so it responds
to the very strong field that's right
but then so some of that sulfur impacts
Europa and then gets radiolytically
processed into sulfate and other forms
of sulfur which then if mixed into the
ocean sulfate sulfate microbes on Earth
sulfate and then get it get this so what
happens when you split apart H2O water
you get o and H some of that H escapes
to space some of the o recombines with o
forming
H2O2 H2O2 is hydrogen
peroxide we have observed which is the
same thing as what anyone would call
peroxide exactly the pharmacy in the
pharmacy yes yeah and and so that's that
old joke you know the old joke no what's
that someone goes to the bar and said I
like some H2O and then they hand him a
glass of water and then someone sees
that say I want some
H2O2 so they get a glass of and then
they drink it
that' be a very chemically literate
bartender right right and not a very
tasty drink but so so get this that
radiation processing of the ice of the
H2 of the water ice on Europa leads to
the formation of hydrogen peroxide
H2O2 which then that also gets
radiolytically processed or decays to O2
oxygen and telescopically we see
hydrogen peroxide and oxygen in the
surface I have to be very clever to go
from one step to the other to see this
through a game of dominoes and you don't
know where the dominoes are but you
think you do and maybe it is and if it
is this leads to that leads to that and
then you have what you need right except
we actually observe it so to be clear we
see condens phase oxygen on the surface
of your and you think that's how you get
it right we get it radiolytically I do
that in my lab and and uh I love when
you say that I do it in my
lab need somebody I my
lab and that's the fun like lab and
spacecraft I know it's great it's great
and they go hand in hand yeah and so we
can make predictions and uh and it's a
lot of fun but so of course we know that
oxygen is very useful for life on Earth
not just for microbes but for well for
our kind of life mro anerobic life does
not like oxygen to be clear and they
they love sulfur and methane all sorts
of other things but so here you are the
radiation uh environment on the surface
of Europa could produce compounds which
then if delivered to the ocean through
subductions sub some whatever you want
to use could help provide Rich chemistry
to the ocean to sustain a biosphere
within Europa and this will give you
some of the chemical gradient describ
that you exctly so you got
hydrothermal hydrothermal vents on the
bottom of the ocean spewing out things
like methane and hydrogen and sulfide
and then from the ice shell you might
have things like oxygen and sulfate so
you can connect the battery the
biochemical battery and that's how you
make Godzilla
this is the recipe for Godzilla so we
got to wrap this up uh just one point I
I care a lot about words and what they
mean and how they're received um Europa
has water underneath
ice yet you named this Mission europ a
Clipper MH and a Clipper ship from the
19th century floats on water right
swiftly yeah so who came up with the
word clipper I CU that's that's a little
you're not floating anywhere right yeah
you're still so so they they're in the
early days remember that during the Gold
Rush clipper ships were used to very
quickly get people from New York City to
San Francisco yeah they're some of the
fastest ships made they're narrower a
lot of sails the wind can take you
before steam ships of course right and
so by I think the phrase let's get there
on a good clip yeah I think it comes
from Clippers ship the clip is swiftly
the Clipper ship gets you there fast so
so I know you're getting there fast
because you strip down the Falcon heavy
the Falcon heavy doesn't even have
return stages because that that uses
weight that you could put in your
payload right right so you strip it down
put it all in the payload get it out
there as fast as you can get your two
get your two gravity assists you're
there in six years that's right so in
that sense it was a Clipper but not in
the sense that it's floating anywhere I
just got to make I got to get that off
my chest 100% yeah and some of that that
Clipper terminology goes back to Vari
and launch vehicles and stuff all right
well Kevin great to have you back thanks
so much Neil my pleasure and great to
see you and it's an exciting time so if
something bad or good happens to the
Clipper Mission we got to get your back
on to talk about it okay when good laugh
will cry when all the good things happen
uh we got to get you back on we we won't
do it while you're busily receiving the
data but when if there's a break in
there uh you got to come back on anytime
and we can find your book alien oceans
alien oceans I love the asence there
alien search for life in the depths of
space yes there you go all right good
luck with that for sure this has been
Star Talk a JPL Edition oh yeah Neil
degrass Tyson bidding you as always as
they do here to keep looking up
[Music]